









                                    SPRITED

                                       A

                                 Sprite Editor

                                 For Micro-C/PC
                                    and the
                                  LRG Library















                         Dunfield Development Services
                         -----------------------------
                             High quality tools for
                              Embedded Development


                      https://dunfield.themindfactory.com


                       Copyright 1998-2020 Dave Dunfield
                              All rights reserved.



                                 SPRITE Editor

                               TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                         Page

     1. INTRODUCTION                                                        1


     2. USING SPRITED                                                       1

        2.1 The main editing display                                        1
        2.2 Editing Keys                                                    2
        2.3 File Menu                                                       6
    SPRITE Editor                                                    Page: 1


    1. INTRODUCTION

          SPRITED is a small and simple editor which assists in the creation
       and maintenance of sprite images for  use  with  the  Micro-C/PC  LRG
       library's lrg_draw() and lrg_erase() functions. SPRITED allows you to
       create and modify sprite bitmaps quickly and easily, and to save them
       in either the form of a Micro-C array declaration,  or  as  a  binary
       image.

    2. USING SPRITED

       2.1 The main editing display

             The main editing view of the sprite is located on the left hand
          side of the screen,  which is enlarged to provide as large a  view
          of the sprite as possible.  The sprite is also shown "actual size"
          in the upper right hand corner of the screen.

             At the lower right hand  side  of  the  screen,  is  shown  the
          currently selected color,  as well as the six next higher and  six
          next lower color entries in the palette.  The  selected  entry  is
          always centered in this display,  and is also framed by two  small
          line indicators.

             Along  the  bottom  of  the  display  is  the   message   area.
          Informational messages will appear here in green,  while error and
          warning messages will appear in red.  When no message  is  active,
          the display shows the current size  of  the  sprite,  the  current
          cursor position,  and the currently selected color  palette  entry
          number.
    SPRITE Editor                                                    Page: 2


       2.2 Editing Keys

             When the main editing display is active, the following keys may
          be used:

          2.2.1 Up/Down/Left/Right arrow keys - Move cursor

                The arrow keys may be used to  move  the  flashing  "cursor"
             around within the enlarged view  of  the  sprite.  This  cursor
             position will control the location  in  the  sprite  where  the
             actions performed by the remaining keys will take effect.

                Moving the cursor beyond the edge of the sprite will cause a
             "wrap", and the cursor will appear at the opposite edge.

          2.2.2 Home - Home cursor

                The Home key provides a quick shortcut to move the cursor to
             the upper left (0, 0) position.

          2.2.3 PgUp/PgDn - Select color entry

                The PgUp  and  PgDn  keys  will  scroll  through  the  color
             palette,  selecting each color in  turn.  The  color  currently
             selected is indicated in the color display at the  lower  right
             hand of the screen,  and will be the color used for  subsequent
             sprite update operations.

          2.2.4 Ctrl-PgUp/Ctrl-PgDn - Select color entry (paging)

                Pressing Ctrl and PgUp/PgDn behaves exactly  like  PgUp/PgDn
             as noted above,  except that the position is the color  palette
             is scrolled by 14 entries at a time  (The  size  of  the  color
             display),  which allows you to quickly view all colors,  or  to
             easily move to a distant location in the color palette.

          2.2.5 Ctrl-Left/Ctrl-Right arrow keys - Adjust X dimension
          2.2.6 Ctrl-Home/Ctrl-End - Adjust Y dimension

                These keys increase/decrease the X and Y dimensions  of  the
             sprite being edited.  These should be used early in the editing
             process to set the actual final size of the sprite.

          2.2.7 Ins - Insert pixel at cursor

                A single pixel  is  inserted  in  the  line  containing  the
             cursor.  All pixels at the right of the line  will  be  shifted
             over to the right.
    SPRITE Editor                                                    Page: 3


          2.2.8 Del - Delete pixel at cursor

                A single pixel is  deleted  from  the  line  continuing  the
             cursor.  All pixels to the right of the cursor as shifted  over
             to the left.

             NOTE:  Pixels can be inserted vertically or with shifts on  the
             left hand side by using the Flip/Rotate functions  to  reorient
             the sprite before inserting or removing the pixel.

          2.2.9 SPACE - Set color of Pixel

                Sets the  color  of  the  pixel  under  the  cursor  to  the
             currently selected color  (as shown in  the  lower  right  hand
             portion of the display).

          2.2.10 End/ALT-E - End block operation

                This key cancels any  block  which  may  be  in  effect  and
             returns the editor to unbounded operation.

          2.2.11 F1/ALT-Q - Help display

                Displays a brief summary of the keys and functions.

          2.2.12 F2/ALT-G - Get color

                Moves the color palette  selection  position  to  the  color
             entry matching the color currently under the cursor.  Use  this
             key to "pickup" a color from the sprite instead of selecting it
             with PgUp/PgDn.

          2.2.13 F3/ALT-T - Clear (transparent)

                Sets the pixel under the cursor  to  be  transparent  (color
             entry 0).

                If used when a block is active  (See F5/ALT-B),  the  entire
             block is set to be transparent.
    SPRITE Editor                                                    Page: 4


          2.2.14 F4/ALT-F - Fill shape under cursor

                Sets the color of  the  pixel  under  the  cursor,  and  all
             connected pixels  which  match  it's  color  to  the  currently
             selected color. Use this to change the color of a shape.

                Use this at the beginning  (blank sprite)  to set  the  base
             color for the entire sprite  (if not transparent which  is  the
             default).

                If used when  a  block  is  active,  the  color  filling  is
             restricted to the bounds of the block. This has limitations, as
             the cursor  (and hence the starting point)  will have to be  at
             one corner of the block,  however it is very useful for  making
             filled rectangles (including lines).  Simply set up your block,
             if not already one color, press F3/ALT-T to clear it,  and then
             press F4/ALT-F to fill the rectangle.

          2.2.15 F5/ALT-B - Set block marker

                This sets the current cursor location as the  base  position
             of a  "block".  The block will always comprise a rectangle from
             this point to any subsequent cursor position.  When moving  the
             cursor after this command, you will note a box displayed on the
             screen marking the boundaries of the block.

                A block can be used for bounded  clear/fill/flip/rotate  and
             save  operations,  as  well  as  to  perform  copy  and   paste
             operations with the internal clipboard.

                Only one block may be active at any time.  Pressing F5/ALT-B
             when a block is already in effect,  will reposition  the  block
             base position to the current cursor location.

                To cancel a block and return to non-bounded operation, press
             the "End" key.

          2.2.16 F6/ALT-H - Flip Horizontal

                Flips the sprite/block in a horizontal direction  (about the
             vertical axis),  producing a  "mirror image"  of the  original,
             where the left becomes the right  and  the  right  becomes  the
             left.

          2.2.17 F7/ALT-V - Flip Vertical

                Flips the sprite/block in the vertical direction  (about the
             horizontal axis), causing the top to become the bottom, and the
             bottom to become the top.
    SPRITE Editor                                                    Page: 5


          2.2.18 F8/ALT-R - Rotate

                Rotates the sprite 1/4 turn  (90  degrees)  in  a  clockwise
             direction.  This causes the top to become the right hand  side,
             and all other edges to follow suite. Successive applications of
             this function  will  result  in  rotations  of  1/2  turn  (180
             degrees) and 3/4 turn (270 degrees).

                When applied to an entire sprite,  the sprite  need  not  be
             square, however the X and Y dimensions will be swapped whenever
             the sprite is rotated.

                When applied to a block, the block must be square (so as not
             to disturb the rest of the image).

          2.2.19 F9/ALT-C - Copy block to clipboard

                Copies the currently active block to the clipboard,  so that
             it can be pasted back later.  This is useful for both copying a
             block within the sprite,  and for saving a block so that it can
             be restored in the event that you  are  unsatisfied  with  your
             changes.

          2.2.20 F10/ALT-P - Paste block from clipboard

                The block last copied to the clipboard is copied back to the
             sprite at the current cursor position,  which will indicate the
             upper left hand position of the copied block.  In other  words,
             the copied block will extend down  and  to  the  right  of  the
             cursor position.

                To facilitate  easy  flip/rotate  operations  on  the  newly
             copied block,  SPRITED will automatically mark a  block  around
             the newly copied image.  If you do not  wish  to  reorient  the
             image, just press End to cancel this new block.

          2.2.21 ALT-Y - Palette editor

                Allows interactive editing of  the  palette  entry  for  the
             currently selected color.  The screen will show a bar graph for
             the current Red,  Green and Blue color values.  You may use the
             following keys:

                F1-F2 = Adjust RED   color value
                F3-F4 = Adjust GREEN color value
                F5-F6 = Adjust BLUE  color value
                Enter = Exit and save new palette entry.
                Esc   = Exit and discard new palette entry.

          2.2.22 ALT-Z - Set border color

                Sets the color  of  the  editor  borders  to  the  currently
             selected color.  NOTE:  The borders  are  part  of  the  editor
             display only, they are not part of the sprite image.
    SPRITE Editor                                                    Page: 6


          2.2.23 Esc/ALT-X - File menu

                Activates a menu of file operations.

       2.3 File Menu

             The File menu is activated  by  the  Esc  or  ALT-X  keys,  and
          presents the following options.

          2.3.1 [1] - Load SPRITE

                Loads a sprite from file.  If the file extension  is  either
             ".C"  or  ".H",  it is assumed to contain a C  character  array
             definition.  If a different file extension is used, the file is
             read as a binary image.

                NOTE: Parsing of C source is very minimal. The sprite should
             be the only item in the file,  and it should be  in  the  exact
             form as is saved by SPRITED when saving a sprite to a C  source
             file.

                When working with sprites,  it is often convenient to  place
             all of your sprites in separate  'C'  files within a directory,
             along with the SPRITED editor.  You can then  easily  edit  the
             individual sprites.  Sprites files can then be used from any  C
             program with the #include directive.

          2.3.2 [2] Save SPRITE

                Saves the sprite image into a file.

                If used when a block is active,  only  the  content  of  the
             block is written to the file. If no block is active, the entire
             sprite image is written.

                The data is written in the  exact  format  required  by  the
             Micro-C/PC LRG library  functions:  lrg_draw  and  lrg_erase(),
             specifically,  the  first  two  bytes  contain  the  X  and   Y
             dimensions,  and the remaining bytes contain  the  row  by  row
             color values.

                If the file extension is either ".C" or ".H",  the file will
             be written as a C source character array definition  (You  will
             be prompted for the C array name).  If any other file extension
             is used, the file is written as a binary image.
    SPRITE Editor                                                    Page: 7


          2.3.3 [3] Load PALETTE

                Loads the color palette from a C source  file,  and  updates
             the editor color palette to match.  If the  file  extension  is
             either  ".C"  or  ".H",  it is assumed to contain a C character
             array definition.  If a different file extension is  used,  the
             file is read as a binary image.

                NOTE: Parsing of C source is very minimal. The sprite should
             be the only item in the file,  and it should be  in  the  exact
             form as is saved by SPRITED when saving  the  palette  to  a  C
             source file.

          2.3.4 [4] Save PALETTE

                Saves the color palette into a file.

                The data is written as 256  entries  of  three  bytes  each,
             representing the Red,  Green and Blue intensity values for each
             color.

                If the file extension is either ".C" or ".H",  the file will
             be written as a C source  two  dimensional  [256][3]  character
             array definition  (you will be prompted for the C array  name).
             If any other file extension is used,  the file is written as  a
             binary image.

          2.3.5 [5] - Load CLIPBOARD

                Loads a clipboard from sprite image file.  This  provides  a
             convenient way to merge two sprites via  the  F10/altP  "Paste"
             function.

                If the file extension is either ".C" or ".H",  it is assumed
             to contain a C character array definition.  If a different file
             extension is used, the file is read as a binary image.

                NOTE: Parsing of C source is very minimal. The sprite should
             be the only item in the file,  and it should be  in  the  exact
             form as is saved by SPRITED when saving a sprite to a C  source
             file.

          2.3.6 [0] - Exit program

                Terminates SPRITED and returns to the operating system.
